Added Proxmox Docker ZFS Tutorial (#247)
hetzneronline/community-content: tutorials/proxmox-docker-zfs/01.en.md

---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/proxmox-docker-zfs"
slug: "proxmox-docker-zfs"
date: "2020-07-05"
title: "Installing Proxmox and Docker on ZFS"
short_description: "Set up the ultimate virtualization platform using Proxmox and Docker, backed by ZFS storage."
tags: ["Development", "Proxmox", "Containers", "Docker", "Virtualization"]
author: "Kenzi Marcel"
author_link: "https://github.com/kenzim"

> author_img: "https://s.gravatar.com/avatar/aad2e58145359610f0bc11eec5412567?s=80&r=g"

Reviewer: @leojakeson please take a look at this, I am not sure what kind of image sources we want to accept here

Author: is there a preferred image source?

Reviewer: Everyone else used the GitHub avatar, we do not yet have a guideline for profile image sources

Skip to step 1.2 if you wish to use the [Rescue System](https://wiki.hetzner.de/index.php/Hetzner_Rescue-System/en).

#### Step 1.1.1 - Ordering the console

To begin installing Proxmox, you must first order a [KVM console](https://wiki.hetzner.de/index.php/KVM-Console/en). You can do this via the [Hetzner Robot Panel](https://robot.your-server.de/). Navigate to the Servers page (highlighted in blue), select your server, and click on the support tab (highlighted in green)

<img src="images/robot-kvm.jpg" alt="Navigating to the support tab in the Robot interface" title="Navigating to the support tab in the Robot interface" style="zoom:80%;" />

Select Remote Console

<img src="images/support-kvm1.jpg" alt="&quot;Ordering a KVM console&quot;" title="Ordering a KVM console" style="zoom: 80%;" />

You can then order the console. You can select 3 hours if this is your first time, or less if you feel confident. You can also select a timeframe, or ASAP to have it in around 30 minutes to an hour. A reason is not necessary if you don't want to.

<img src="images/support-kvm2.jpg" alt="&quot;Ordering a KVM console&quot;" title="Ordering a KVM console" style="zoom: 67%;" />

> #### Step 1.1.2 - Preparing the ISO

Reviewer: Just FYI: you can also send a link to an ISO file to the technicians, who will then download it to a USB stick and connect it to your server.

Once delivered, you can find the connection info in the storage boxes section of the [Hetzner Robot Panel](https://robot.your-server.de/). You will need to enable Samba and External connectivity to attach it to your server. You can also enable any other remote connection protocol, so you can upload your ISO. Personally, I used the Samba protocol to add it as a network drive on my Windows PC.

Once you have access to the box, you can now download the Proxmox ISO. The latest 6.2 ISO can be downloaded [here](https://www.proxmox.com/en/downloads/category/iso-images-pve). Once you have downloaded the ISO, upload it to the storage box using your chosen protocol.

If you don't have access to a storage box, you can download the ISO to your computer locally, and mount it in the KVM viewer. You can skip the next step if this is the case.

#### Step 1.1.3 - Mounting the ISO

> After the console is ordered, you will receive an email with instructions on how to access the console. There will be a link to the console control panel, which will have to be opened in Firefox. Chrome and Opera will not work, but your mileage may vary with other browsers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the console is ordered, you will receive an email with instructions on how to access the console. There will be a link to the console control panel, which will have to be opened in your browser.
```

At least for me it also worked in Chromium. I expect it also depends on the KVM, there are Java and HTML5 KVMs.

<img src="images/proxmox3.png" alt="&quot;Install Proxmox&quot;" title="Install Proxmox"  />

Once Proxmox is installed, you can reboot the server. You can do that by pressing the reboot button at the end of the installation when using a [KVM console](https://wiki.hetzner.de/index.php/KVM-Console/en), or you can type `reboot` in the SSH session you have open to the [Rescue System](https://wiki.hetzner.de/index.php/Hetzner_Rescue-System/en).

### Step 2.1 - Can't Access Server After Rescue Install

Sometimes, when you install using the [Rescue System](https://wiki.hetzner.de/index.php/Hetzner_Rescue-System/en), the network adapter name inside the installation VM and the host is different. This means that when you reboot, the network does not configure properly, since the adapter is named something else. Luckily, Debian uses a predictable network interface name scheme, so we can fix this quite easily.

> Firstly, you will need to reboot back into the [Rescue System](https://wiki.hetzner.de/index.php/Hetzner_Rescue-System/en). Then, run `ip a` to see the network adapters you have installed. The one you will want to use will most likely be called `eth0` but in the case you have multiple network adapters, pick the adapter name you want to use for the Proxmox management network. Then, run the following command:

Reviewer: You could probably also mount your partition and edit the interface configuration through the normal rescue system? Why did you choose vKVM here?

Author: mounting the zfs pool in rescue is tricky, the mountpoint is meant to be /, but thats already being used, so it wont mount. after you mount somewhere else, on rebooting, sometimes it wont auto remount back to / as it failed last time. i suppose you could spin up the virtual machine again and boot into the system, but thats what vkvm is there for anyway

### Step 4.1 - Enabling forwarding

To enable forwarding of IPV4 and IPV6 addresses, you need to add the following lines to `/etc/sysctl.conf`

```bash
net.ipv4.ip_forward=1
net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding=1
```

You can then run `sysctl -p` to make these changes take effect.

### Step 4.2 - Creating Bridges

For each IP Subnet, you will need to create a new bridge. For additional IPs, you will only need one bridge for them all. For this example, I will use the additional subnet `10.0.2.0/29`. This represents 8 IP addresses, 6 of which are usable, but one will be used by the bridge, leaving only 5 for VMs. To create the bridge, add the following configuration to `/etc/network/interfaces`. You can use a tool like `nano` to edit files, by running commands like `nano /etc/network/interfaces`.

```bash

> auto vmbr0

Reviewer: You already used vmbr0 for your main interface above

To apply these network configurations, you can simply reboot by typing `reboot` at the terminal.

### Step 4.3 - Network configuration inside the VM

Since we are using bridges, the network details needed to connect the IP will be different to the details in the [Hetzner Robot Panel](https://robot.your-server.de/). For IPV4 subnets, you can use the following details:

| Field   | Value                    | Description                                                  |
| ------- | ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| IP      | `10.0.2.2`               | Where `10.0.0.2` is a usable IP not being used by the bridge |
| Gateway | `10.0.2.1`               | Where `10.0.2.1` is IP being used by the bridge              |
| Netmask | `255.255.255.248` or /29 | The same as your ordered subnet                              |

For additional IPs, you can use these details:

| Field   | Value                    | Description                             |
| ------- | ------------------------ | --------------------------------------- |

> | IP      | ``10.0.0.27``            | Where `10.0.0.27` is a an additional IP |

Reviewer: Double back ticks here

| Gateway | `10.0.0.1`               | Where `10.0.0.1` is the main host IP    |
| Netmask | `255.255.255.255` or /32 |                                         |

For IPV6, irrespective of the bridge being used on additional IPs or subnets, you can use these details:

| Field   | Value                  | Description                                                  |
| ------- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| IP      | `2a01:4f8:8:8:0:1:0:3` | Where `2a01:4f8:8:8:0:1:0:3` is an address in the subnets block, not being used by the bridge |
| Gateway | `2a01:4f8:8:8:0:1:0:2` | Where `2a01:4f8:8:8:0:1:0:2` is the address being used by the bridge |
| Netmask | `ffff:ffff::` or /96   | Or `ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff::` or /64 depending on how you have split up your block. |

## Step 5 - Adding your storage box as an ISO repository

If you don't have access to a storage box, you can skip this step.

> Since you now have your complementary storage box setup, you may as well use it for your ISOs. To do this, log into the web interface at `https://<10.0.0.1>:8006`, where `<10.0.0.1>` is your main IP, and select Datacentre on the left hand pane (green box). Then navigate to storage, and press Add CIFS (blue box).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since you now have your complementary storage box setup, you may as well use it for your ISOs. To do this, log into the web interface at `https://<10.0.0.1>:8006`, where `<10.0.0.1>` is your main IP, and select Datacenter on the left hand pane (green box). Then navigate to storage, and press Add CIFS (blue box).
```

## Step 6 - Installing Docker

Now that Proxmox is installed, you may also want to install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/). This will allow you to make more containers and utilise the huge repository of images available for [Docker](https://www.docker.com/).

### Step 6.1 - Installation

To install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/), run the following commands on your server:

```bash
apt install -y apt-transport-https ca-certificates curl gnupg2 software-properties-common
curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/debian/gpg | apt-key add -
apt-key fingerprint 0EBFCD88
add-apt-repository "deb [arch=amd64] https://download.docker.com/linux/debian $(lsb_release -cs) stable"
apt update
apt install docker-ce -y
```

### Step 6.2 - Configuring ZFS Storage Driver

For Docker to work properly on this ZFS server, we need to enable the ZFS storage driver for Docker. First, run the following commands:

```bash

> service docker stop

Reviewer: can you use systemctl here too?

rm -rf /var/lib/docker
zfs create -o mountpoint=/var/lib/docker rpool/docker
mkdir /etc/systemd/system/docker.service.d
```

This will put all the docker data onto a new ZFS volume. Next, we need to create the file `/etc/systemd/system/docker.service.d/storage-driver.conf` and add the following to it:

```bash
[Service]
ExecStart=
ExecStart=/usr/bin/dockerd --storage-driver=zfs -H fd://
```

Finally, reboot docker by running the following commands:

```bash
systemctl daemon-reload

> service docker start

Reviewer: can you use systemctl here too?
